I'm sort of careful about what I say in
relation to my own my own eccentricities
because the truth is I am a
conventionally mentally healthy person I
don't have any problems I don't have any
learning disabilities I don't have any
emotional problems I don't have any
psychological problems but I very
carefully examine I really very
thoroughly reflect on the things that
set me apart from shall we say my own
brothers and sisters because I come from
a large family and it is interesting if
you have many brothers and sisters
people who are genetically similar to
you then the psychological differences
the intellectual differences may stand
out you know to a greater extent it may
be easier for you to see hey this is a
neither nurture in our nature but just a
difference between people when you got
brothers or sisters to compare yourself
to um you know one I think you've all
heard me talk about quite a bit is the
fact that I don't feel jealousy believe
me my brothers and sisters feel jealousy
like I'm aware this is a very very
unusual element of my character whether
that psychological intellectual or what
but I've said many many times that's not
ethical that's not like a decision I
made I didn't choose to not feel
jealousy and I've also said you know I
think you guys have heard me talk about
the role of sympathy in life I talked
about sympathy being an analytical tool
jealousy also you know draws people into
understanding one another and thinking
about their relations with one another
in a pretty dynamic way but I can see
how in terms of evolutionary time human
beings have benefited from jealousy like
you know over millions of years at least
the way it draws one person's attention
to the other makes one person examine
and try to understand another and
understand a group dynamic and hierarchy
and there are a lot of behaviors over
over the scale of hundreds of thousands
of years and millions of years that come
out of come out of jealousy which you
can see of see as being positive in
relation to survival of the species em
but I don't feel jealousy so look I
really examine very thoroughly the
things that psychologically make me
both people and one that was mentioned a
long time ago and some people were
freaked out about is the fact that in my
adult life I do not have dreams I do not
dream in the conventional sense of the
term and I stopped having normal dreams
many many years ago so you know why is
that well at a very early age I became
in the minority of people who have
what's called lucid dreaming so when I
was young not all of the time but very
often if I had a dream I would become
aware that it was a dream and then from
my position within the dream as a lucid
dreamer as someone who was aware that
they're dreaming I could manipulate the
reality of the dream I could change it
to be anything so you know once you know
it's a dream if you are a lucid dreamer
you can just choose to be at the ocean
and suddenly you're at the ocean you can
choose to do anything see anything talk
to anybody you have a comic book like
super power to recreate the false
reality around you but of course it's
meaningless because you know it's false
now when I first was coming into this
behavior you know i can remember testing
how detailed was the reality of the
world of dreams you know something that
really surprised me for example i can
remember in a dream this is when i was
figuring out how to lucid dream at work
i took a book off of the bookshelf and
as rapidly as possible was reading the
pages in the book while flipping through
them in the dream and your mind is
generating the text in the book and so
for me at least this may not be true if
you also can control your dreams you
also if lucid dreaming if I did it
slowly you know if it is read at a
normal pace then my imagination could
generate as much text as I wanted in the
book and on any topic your imagination
is racing ahead of you all the time to
fill in the blanks in reality as you
perceive it when you're awake
and your mind is doing that when you're
dreaming also but if I went through very
very quickly the book I could not you
know i would i would be able to catch
myself so to speak I'd be able to
perceive my mind generating it I'd be
able to perceive that you know the false
reality the illusion of the dream was
racing to to fill up the pages as fast
as I was glancing through them yeah now
of course a lot of creative artists are
fascinated by this once you get into
lucid dreaming if you're something like
a songwriter many many people who
compose music you know pop music or
something they try to use dreams in this
way to generate song lyrics or poetry or
new ideas and you can but you know the
quality of your creative output is much
better when you're awake um you know I
could do that also but if I was if I was
rigorously you know writing down new
ideas that came out of my dreams whether
ideas for you know creative arts stories
or songs or you know ideas of other
kinds look maybe one percent of them are
good ideas like maybe five percent are
like useful ideas not even good maybe
five percent of it is useful but no if
you sit down when you're awake and and
write a song that's going to be a song
that you know reflects rational things
and it's interesting to your audience as
some kind of quality and if you rely on
your dreams then you know you could do
hundreds and hundreds and out of the
hundreds you create a few probably would
be would be good but it's it's going to
be a sifting process like that anyway so
I'm somebody who both is acutely aware
of dreams and you know when a sense
disregards them oh right so another
example of that with lucid dreaming back
when it was kind of new to me I remember
I I was interested in testing how
detailed this reality was and so I went
around and was looking at a lot of
things that you're not you're not
intentionally visualizing in the dream
so I looked down at the dirt on the
ground and you know moved the dirt with
my foot and went around and looked at
you know this kind of completely boring
detail of the dream to see how much
this was being filled in in my mind's
eye and one of the details that really
surprised me was that I went up to a
window I imagined myself at a real-life
location in the dream you know a window
of reinforced glass so it's glass that
has chicken wire in it and I walked up
to the window and looked and I could see
the reflection of my own face you know
in the in the glass you know I was
really surprised that wow you know just
the the extent to which those types of
details are filled in in the illusion of
the room and then when I was surprised I
could also see the reflection of my own
face I could see how surprised that was
but of course there are other limits I
mean you know my my ability to to speak
German is limited you know I I do still
understand some German so if I try to
push myself in the dream to speak German
or to have a conversation with somebody
else in German my mind can't really do
that right so you know because I only
know so much German so you know which is
also i mean again when you're first
having this kind of dream you know it's
uh you know it's interesting to push
those limits and you know obviously if
you have a conversation with someone
else you can you know you can in lucid
room you can conjure up any historical
character but what they're actually
gonna say to you is just you talking to
yourself obviously you figure that out
pretty quick with lucid dreaming and you
know if it's if it's an historical
person you've done a lot of research on
you know they're going to save the
things that reflect your opinion of them
or the researcher Dunham but that's it
absolutely for me that's absolutely no
interest and I have had some some
interesting philosophical conversations
in my dreams but it's normally because
it's something I've been thinking about
a lot doing a lot of work on when I was
awake and even though those dreams some
of them were interesting where I had a
kind of debate about philosophy or
politics while was dreaming um it's
never going to be as good or useful or
productive as the kind of debate you can
have when you're awake so I just say
there are obvious limits to to lucid
dreaming but a lot of people I mean not
a lot of people some people creative
artists you get fascinated with lucid
dream
because they hope it can be a kind of
factory for them to generate new ideas a
new perspective of the world and maybe
it can be maybe it can be for some but
very very rarely is the perspective
generated by lucid dreaming useful
however I've got to tell you the final
outcome of those years of lucid dreaming
was an end to dreaming itself in my
adult life you know as i got older i can
say i just stopped dreaming entirely and
i can remember the timeline of that and
like you know until very recently if i
had a dream at all just for a couple of
seconds i would not realize it was a
dream you know i might have a couple of
seconds of kind of normal dream
experience and then every rose oh it's a
dream and just forget it cuz i before
the plights not interesting to me
anymore it's not there's no there's no
fascination I just want to get a good
night's sleep or also it was only when I
was really advanced in lucid dreaming
that I could be in the state I think
relatively few people experience this
where I am asleep I am aware that I'm
asleep and dreaming and I can
simultaneously perceive the false
reality of dreaming and the real reality
of the world outside me so for example
if there were strange noises in my
apartment I can remain asleep but I can
use my senses I can hear perceive the
real world they go is that a problem
then return asleep where I can I can
also you know sense you know my body
lying in the bed without waking up
that's very very strange when you first
have that experience of simultaneously
perceiving the real world and the world
of your dreams um it's quite disturbing
when you first do it but you get used to
it um and again I think most people
don't don't perceive those types of
states or not not often but look for me
I mean obviously I've just been
describing what was interesting or
fascinating to me about lucid dream when
I was first discovering it it does for
someone like me that does not stay
interesting for long I'm not interested
in dreams and not interested in fantasy
I'm interested in reality the whole
emphasis is my channel whether I'm
talking about politics or history or
anything else is kind of real real real
and so you know dreaming itself really
disappeared from my life now you know I
mean again it's many many years ago the
last time I can remember having a kind
of normal dream was when i was living in
Cambodia and I don't even know is that
six years ago seven years ago I've had a
long long period again even then one was
living in Cambodia I didn't regularly
have normal dreams was once in a long
while and I can remember it may be just
two points during my marriage which
ended in divorce case you don't know
kiss you at nerd I remember maybe used
two points discussing with my wife dream
I had I think she didn't get it because
for me to have a normal dream in the
sense of a dream that I'm not in control
of where I'm not having I'm not lucid
dreaming or I'm not you know that's very
rare and very unusual for me and I don't
put any kind of spiritual you know
importance on it but a does normally
very very clearly reflect something I've
been worried about look something I've
been thinking about so just in that
sense it's like well gee you know had
this dream if it was a normal dream a
non non non lucid dream and this dream
shows me that I'm really a lot more
concerned about this topic then I
thought I was it's just on that level
that i would i would want to talk about
some of the way obviously i feel more
strongly about this subject but i gotta
say since cambodia since i left cambodia
i don't know if i had a single normal
dream in that sense so just lately I'm
you know I didn't want to put too fine a
point on it but just lately I've started
a new relationship you know with the new
girlfriend and I'm very optimistic about
it and very optimistic about her I'm
really hopeful about that relationship
short-term and long-term and I'm hopeful
that in the best way which is you know
even if we don't work as a couple
we're gonna work as friends which to me
means a lot I don't you guys have
noticed that about a lot of videos
lately like the rich piana video
reflecting on how difficult it is to
make friends once you're a fully-grown
adult I mean you know if that
relationship ends not in love but in
friendship I'd be happy about that too
for me that's a big win anyway but you
know I'm very optimistic about that and
you know I was hesitant because I didn't
want her to ascribe too much meaning to
it but just now these last few days
these last few weeks I'd have to figure
out exactly when it started I've been
having normal dreams again first time in
so many years and you know that also
okay why is that I do think that mean
right now my whole life not just my
relationship with this woman I think
there is really a kind of optimism and
hope in my life that I haven't had for
many many many years that's that's
probably one element of it but the other
element keeping it all the way real is
just that the start of this relationship
has really disturbed my sleep I've been
sleeping very very unusually in the lead
of this relationship partly used to do
you know anticipation and you know
positive emotional connections and
partly due to you know worrying about
airplane tickets and hotel reservations
and a lot of details like that and we've
had you know we've had a little bit of
drama where I had to get to know her
parents which is fine it's a little bit
strange but you know I talked to her
parents on skype and there was a lot of
a lot of indirect communication to me
and her parents you know reassuring them
lindo situation is so there are a lot of
things that could just disturb your
sleep and it's totally possible that you
know what's the relationship gets in
their way or whatever a meal
relationship may not last I don't have
any you know as I say could end in
friendship can go in one direction or
another it's fine i'm i'm happy with it
no matter what direction it goes in how
it ends up but yeah for me that's a
striking contrast and is why i made this
video talking
the hit the history of sleep in my life
was that for me it was very unexpected
to now suddenly for the first time in so
many years be having normal dreams and I
said this in the conversation with tofu
goddess but I don't I don't think I
don't think you see it in the edited
podcast maybe just because it was too
boring but I mean one of these I said
you were kind of the beginning the
middle and the end of the conversation
is you know right now this is a really
positive time in my life in my whole
adult life um you know without even
getting into the new girlfriend I don't
know if there's ever been another period
of even one month that I could say was
happy most of my adult life has been
misery it's been meaningful misery a lot
of it not all of it you know I've been
miserable for good reasons but um sure
you know moving to Hong starting this
new shaft of my life sure compared to
the situation I was in in victoria bc in
taiwan in kunming in cambodia in laos in
saskatchewan sure right now whether or
not it's linked to my return to you know
childlike dreaming that's what it is for
me it's a type of dreaming that's been
strange to me since childhood just
having a normal dream look anyone else
has maybe that signals the rekindling of
some optimism my life